Every day, a sea of decisions stretches before us. Some
are small and unimportant, but others have a larger impact
on our lives. For example, which politician should I vote
for? Should I try the latest diet craze? Or will
email make me a millionaire? We're bombarded with so many
decisions that it's impossible to make a perfect choice every
time. But there are many ways to improve our chances,
and one particularly effective technique is critical thinking. This is
a way of approaching a question that allows us to
carefully deconstruct a situation, reveal its hidden issues, such as
bias and manipulation, and make the best decision. If the
critical part sounds negative, that's because in a way it
is. Rather than choosing an answer because it feels right,
a person who uses critical thinking subjects all available options
to scrutiny and skepticism. Using the tools at their disposal,
they'll eliminate everything but the most useful and reliable information.
There are many different ways of approaching critical thinking, but
here's one five-step process that may help you solve any
number of problems. One, formulate your question. In other
words, know what you're looking for. This isn't always as
straightforward as it sounds. For example, if you're deciding whether
to try out the newest diet craze, your reasons for
doing so may be obscured by other factors, like claims
that you'll see results in just two weeks. But if
you approach the situation with a clear view of what
you're actually trying to accomplish by dieting, whether that's weight
loss, better nutrition, or having more energy, that'll equip you
to sift through this information critically, find what you're looking
for, and decide whether the new fad really suits your
needs. Two, gather your information.
There's lots of it out there, so having a clear
idea of your question will help you determine what's relevant.
If you're trying to decide on a diet to improve
your nutrition, you may ask an expert for their advice
or seek other people's testimonies. Information gathering helps you weigh
different options, moving you closer to a decision that meets
your goal. Three, apply the information, something you do
by asking critical questions. Facing a decision, ask yourself, "What
concepts are at work? What assumptions exist? Is my interpretation
of the information logically sound?" For example, in an email
that promises you millions, you should consider, "What is shaping
my approach to this situation? Do I assume the sender
is telling the truth? Based on the evidence, is it
logical to assume I'll win any money?" Four,
consider the implications. Imagine it's election time and you've selected
a political candidate based on their promise to make it
cheaper for drivers to fill up on gas. At first
glance, that seems great, but what about the long-term environmental
effects? If gasoline use is less restricted by cost, this
could also cause a huge surge in air pollution, an
unintended consequence that's important to think about. Five,
explore other points of view. Ask yourself why so many
people are drawn to the policies of the opposing political
candidate. Even if you disagree with everything that candidate says,
exploring the full spectrum of viewpoints might explain why some
policies that don't seem valid to you appeal to others.
This will allow you to explore alternatives, evaluate your own
choices, and ultimately help you make more informed decisions.
This five-step process is just one tool, and it certainly
won't eradicate difficult decisions from our lives, but it can
help us increase the number of positive choices we make.
Critical thinking can give us the tools to sift through
a sea of information and find what we're looking for.
And if enough of us use it, it has the
power to make the world a more reasonable place.